/**

\page TutorialSpherical Constructing a quasar model in spherical coordinates

In this tutorial, you study the polarization characteristics of the UV emission from a typical quasar using a SKIRT
model that benefits from being simulated in spherical coordinates. Although you can download all ingredients to perform
the simulations being discussed, the text is perhaps conceived more as a case study than as a detailed tutorial.

Along the way, you will:
 - construct a nontrivial model that uses the library of geometries and dust mixtures built into SKIRT.
 - use a geometry decorator to adjust the model.
 - configure a spatial grid (for radiative transfer) using spherical coordinates.
 - discover the important benefits of 2D and 3D spherical grids for the type of models under consideration.


\section TutorialSphericalBegin Getting ready

This text below assumes that you have completed the introductory SKIRT tutorials \ref TutorialBasicsMono and \ref
TutorialBasicsPan, and that you have reviewed the topics on \ref UserSpatialGrids and \ref UserPolarize, or that you
have otherwise acquired the working knowledge introduced there.

While you do not necessarily need to run any SKIRT simulations to follow along with this tutorial/case study, it
certainly is instructive to review the ski files being discussed. Thus, begin by downloading the ski files using the
links provided in the table below.

If you do want to perform the simulations on your system. pehaps in slightly modified form, then you should obviously
have installed the SKIRT code, and preferably also PTS and a FITS file viewer such as DS9 (see \ref InstallationGuide).


<TABLE>
<TR><TH>Ski file for 2D model</TH>
  <TD><a href="https://sciences.ugent.be/skirtextdat/SKIRTC/Tutorials/TutorialSpherical2D.ski">TutorialSpherical2D.ski</a>
  </TD>
<TR><TH>Ski file for 3D model</TH>
  <TD><a href="https://sciences.ugent.be/skirtextdat/SKIRTC/Tutorials/TutorialSpherical3Dtop.ski">TutorialSpherical3Dtop.ski</a>
  </TD>
<TR><TH>Ski file for 3D model</TH>
  <TD><a href="https://sciences.ugent.be/skirtextdat/SKIRTC/Tutorials/TutorialSpherical3Dbot.ski">TutorialSpherical3Dbot.ski</a>
  </TD>
</TABLE>


\section TutorialSphericalModel2D The 2D model

Imagine you plan to develop a suite of SKIRT models for interpreting the (rest frame) UV polarization of so-called Blue
Hot DOGs (hot dust-obscured galaxies with excess of blue emission), an intriguing subpopulation of heavily obscured
quasars. You start by constructing and studying a single representative model (described here). You can subsequently
vary the parameters of the model to investigate the effects of the precise geometry on the results (not described
here).

Your basic model specifies a typical configuration for an active galactic nucleus (AGN), namely a central point source
surrounded by a torus and a conical shell. Since you are interested in UV polarization, the torus has a role of
blocking the central source, while most of the polarization signal is produced by scattering in the cone. The
illustration below shows a vertical cut through the medium density distribution. Note the large dynamic range: the cone
is about 5 orders of magnitude less dense than the torus.

Vertical cut through basic model | Vertical cut zoomed in on central portion |
|----|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalCut1All.png) | ![ ](TutorialSphericalCut1Zoom.png) |

This model is described in the \c TutorialSpherical2D.ski file. Open this file in a text editor and locate the various
elements described below.

- The simulation mode is extinction-only because the focus is on scattering in the UV regime; there is no interest in
secondary emission from the medium.

- The simulation mode is oligochromatic, implying that the simulation runs at a small set of discrete wavelengths.
These wavelengths are specified in the \em wavelengths property of the SourceSystem. This is essentially a way to
shorten the run time of the simulation: rather than distributing the photon packets over a continuous wavelength range,
they are concentrated in a few wavelength points. This is acceptable for this simulation because (1) there is no
interest in obtaining the detailed spectrum, (2) there are no kinematics so the wavelength of a photon packet never
changes, and (3) there is no need to store the radiation field to calculate secondary emission.

- The PointSource is configured with the built-in QuasarSED and normalized to an arbitrary luminosity. Because the
simulation considers extinction only, the resulting fluxes are linearly proportional to the source luminosity.

- The TorusGeometry is configured with a dust mixture containing graphite and silicate grains with a custom size
distribution and offering support for polarization. The \em scatteringType property of the ConfigurableDustMix is set
to "SphericalPolarization". The radial optical depth is set to \f$\tau_{9.7\mu\text{m}}=5\f$ in the infrared, which
means that the UV optical depth will be significantly higher (see below).

- The ConicalShellGeometry is configured with a dust mixture that contains just graphite grains, again offering support
for polarization. The radial optical depth is set to \f$\tau_\text{V}=0.1\f$ in the V band, which means that the UV
optical depth will be somewhat higher (see below).

The illustration below shows an all-sky projection of the UV optical depth viewed from the model center. Note that
equatorial (edge-on) sight lines show a radial optical depth of \f$\tau_{0.21\mu\text{m}}>200\f$.

| All-sky optical depth at \f$0.21~\mu\text{m}\f$ for basic model |
|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalDepth1.png) |

- The properties for the geometry, density exponent, and optical depth of the TorusGeometry and the
ConicalShellGeometry have representative values that could be varied for other instances of this model.

- The internal spatial grid of the simulation, used to perform radiative transfer, is configured to a
Sphere2DSpatialGrid. The axial symmetry of the model allows selecting a 2D grid, with cells defined in a meridional
plane and revolved around the central vertical axis. This reduces the number of cells required to properly resolve the
spatial domain, lowering memory requirements and accelerating run times. The choice for a grid defined in spherical
coordinates allows the cell borders to precisely line up with the boundaries of both the torus and the cone (see the
vertical cuts and optical depth map shown above, which are taken from the gridded density distribution).

- The SEDInstrument instances have sight lines ranging from just outside the torus (no obscuration) to edge-on (maximum
obscuration). They are configured to record polarization, i.e. the Stokes vector components, also to record the
scattering and direct flux components separately (not used here, but could be interesting to study).

The solid lines in the plot below show the simulated linear polarization (in percent) for the four sight lines as a
function of wavelength. For a definition of linear polarization, refer to \ref UserPolarize. Please ignore the dashed
and dotted lines for now; they are discussed in the next section. The unobscured sight line (black) shows no
polarization because direct emission of the unpolarized source fully dominates any scattered component. The edge-on
sight line (blue) shows maximum polarization because (1) direct emission is strongly attenuated and (2) the 90 deg
scattering angle from the source maximizes polarization strength.


| Polarization for models with full and half cone |
|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalPolSphe.png) |


\section TutorialSphericalModel3D The 3D model

The observations of some of the Blue Hot DOGs under study show only a single cone. To mimick this in your SKIRT model,
you employ a geometry decorator to remove the top or bottom portion of the "dual" cone. This results in two models, one
with a cone pointing towards the instruments and one with a cone pointing away from the instruments. (Alternatively,
you could use a single cone-configuration and add instruments at inclinations below the equatorial plane.)

The model with just the top portion of the cone is described in the \c TutorialSpherical3Dtop.ski file. Open this file
in a text editor and review the differences with the original model as described below.

- The ConicalShellGeometry is now enclosed inside a BoxClipGeometryDecorator that removes the bottom portion of the
cone. Because this decorator uses Cartesian coordinates to define the clipped region, it breaks the axial symmetry in
the model. One could conceivably develop a clip decorator that preserves axial symmetry in this situation, but another
solution is available as described next.

- The spatial grid in the new ski file is "upgraded" to a Sphere3DSpatialGrid, which does not require any symmetries in
the geometry of the model, but still employs spherical coordinates to define the cells. This preserves the important
benefit of aligning the grid cell borders with the boundaries of the torus and cone density distributions.

The illustrations below show the vertical cuts and optical depth map for this adjusted model.

| Vertical cut through model with top cone | Vertical cut zoomed in on central portion |
|----|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalCut2All.png) | ![ ](TutorialSphericalCut2Zoom.png) |


| All-sky optical depth at \f$0.21~\mu\text{m}\f$ for model with top cone |
|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalDepth2.png) |

Similarly, the \c TutorialSpherical3Dbot.ski file describes the model with just the bottom portion of the cone. The
only difference is the value of the BoxClipGeometryDecorator \em remove property.

The polarization results for these new models are also plotted in the figure shown at the end of the previous section.
The dashed lines reflect the model where the cone is oriented towards the instruments; the dotted lines where the cone
is oriented away from the instrument. For the unobscured and edge-on sight lines, the results are identical, as
expected. For the intermediate sight lines, the polarization fraction is higher when the cone is oriented towards the
instrument. This seems to be a reasonable result.


\section TutorialSphericalOctree The failure of the Octree

The hierarchical octree has become the spatial grid of choice for a large class of models, and especially for imported
3D medium density distributions. It automatically places smaller cells in regions of higher density or optical depth,
providing an optimal balance between resolution (quality) and number of cells (memory usage and run time).

However, the octree grid fails to deliver for the quasar models considered here. The figure below compares the
polarization characteristics for the dual-cone model calculated by a simulation using an octree grid to those
calculated with a (2D or 3D) spherical grid. The octree grid has well over 16 million cells, i.e. slightly more than
the number of cells in the grid for the 3D model.


| Comparing polarization for spherical and octree grids |
|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalPolOct.png) |

It is obvious that the results differ dramatically. Further testing (not explored here) shows that the models with just
the top and bottom cones, simulated with the octree grid, produce clearly inconsistent results for the edge-on sight
line (which should be identical for both models). This clearly indicates that the octree grid causes a problem. Even
refining the octree grid to a hefty 180 million cells (using 120 GB of memory) does not solve the issue.

The figures below show a vertical cut and all-sky map using the density distribution gridded with an octree of 16
million cells (i.e. the simulation producing the polarization results shown in the above plot).

| Vertical cut through model using octree grid | Vertical cut zoomed in on central portion |
|----|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalCut3All.png) | ![ ](TutorialSphericalCut3Zoom.png) |


| All-sky optical depth at \f$0.21~\mu\text{m}\f$ for model using octree grid|
|----|
| ![ ](TutorialSphericalDepth3.png) |


It is evident that the cells of the octree, which are aligned with the Cartesian coordinate axes, are unable to
properly resolve the slanted borders of the torus and cone geometry. Furthermore, the edges of the low-density cone are
discretized with significantly larger cells than those of the torus. This is caused by the subdivision algorithm used
by the SKIRT octree grid, which is mostly controlled by density and optical depth. Because the cone is 5 orders of
magnitude less dense than the torus, it is exceedlingly hard to have the octree use smaller cells for the cone, unless
by resolving the empty space in the model by a large number of unnecessarily small cells.

The polarization characteristics of the observed radiation in the models discussed here are dominated by scattering
strengths and scattering angles, mostly off the low-density cone and perhaps the edges of the torus. This causes the
results to be very sensitive to the precise geometry of the density distribution, and thus to its precise
discretization. Because of the model's makeup, a grid defined in spherical coordinates is much better suited to do this
well than a Cartesian octree. Note that this situation arises in part because the synthetic model specifies very steep
(actually, infinite) gradients at the borders of the density distributions. Still, even in a more realistic setting,
the Cartesian octree cells will have trouble "following" the slanted surfaces.

<b><i>Congratulations, you made it to the end of this tutorial!</i></b>

*/
