/**

\page AdminResources Creating resources and resource packs

## Introduction

SKIRT offers many "built-in" simulation components that require a significant amount of data, such as source spectra or
optical medium properties. This information is loaded from external resource files located next to the SKIRT
executable. The available resource files are bundled in resource packs which can be downloaded and installed separately
from the source code (see \ref InstallSKIRTUnixResource). The Core resource pack is obligatory; the other packs are
optional so that users can avoid using disk space for resources that are not used in their simulations.

Most resource files are distributed in the binary "stored table" file format with the ".stab" filename extension. The
use of this SKIRT-specific file format avoids implementing a plethora of input data formats in SKIRT and allows
efficient loading of the file contents. As a result, resource data obtained from third parties must be converted to
stored table format before being included in a resource pack. Resource packs are simply ZIP archives.

In conjunction with the download procedure, SKIRT implements a versioning system for resource packs. A resource pack
advertises its version number as part of its file name and in a tiny text file enclosed in the pack. On the other hand,
the SKIRT code includes a text file listing the expected version for each of the known resource packs. This way, SKIRT
can log an error or warning message if there is a mismatch between the expected and installed versions.

Within the SKIRT code, resource files are identified by their filename, without any directory or path information. In
other words, a resource file can be located in any (nested) subdirectory of a resource pack. On the other hand, this
means that resource file names must be unique across all resource packs.

The Resource9 directory contains the orginal data obtained from a third party where applicable, the corresponding
"stored table" files consumed by SKIRT, the resource packs to be made available for public download, the specifications
for converting between these formats, and the procedures for publishing the resource packs to the SKIRT data file
server.


## Specifying a SKIRT resource

As indicated in the introduction, the input data for a resource is often available in a file format not under the
control of the SKIRT team. Such data needs to be converted to stored table format.

Each (nested) subdirectory of the Resources9/OriginalData directory contains the following files:
 - A \c Notes.txt text file with free format documentation on the source of the data.
 - A \c ConversionSpec.txt text file specifying the conversion mechanism for the resource data,
   including input and output file names.
 - Any required input files, possibly in one or more subdirectories.

The conversion specification drives the corresponding Python functions found in the pts.storedtable module. For more
information, see pts.storedtable.conversionspec and the implementations of the conversion functions, found in the
Python source files named "convert_*.py" in the pts.storedtable package. To handle cases where no conversion is needed,
there a copy "conversion" function.

The output of the conversion operation is always stored in a subdirectory of the Resources9/StoredTables directory.


## Constructing a SKIRT resource


For more information, see:
- pts.storedtable.do.construct_skirt_resources


## Creating a SKIRT resource pack


For more information, see pts.admin.do.create_resource_archives

*/
