/**

\page UserImportColOrder Adjusting column order in import files

The topic \ref UserImportSnap describes how to format column text files for importing data in SKIRT. By default, the
columns in these files must be provided in the order expected by the SKIRT class governing the import. However, SKIRT
also offers some schemes to allow more flexible column ordering. The formal rules are presented in the documentation of
the TextInFile class and the TextInFile::useColumns() function. The capabilities are illustrated below in a more
accessable manner through an example.

- \ref UserImportColOrderDefault
- \ref UserImportColOrderExplicit
- \ref UserImportColOrderAutomatic


\section UserImportColOrderDefault Default column order

For clarity of presentation, we consider a specific example throughout this page. Assume that we plan to study the 21
cm hydrogen spin-flip transition in a density distribution extracted from a 2D hydrodynamical simulation snapshot
defined in cylindrical coordinates. To accomplish this, we might construct the relevant part of the ski file as
follows:

    <CylindricalCellMedium
            filename="spin.txt" autoRevolve="true" numAutoRevolveBins="16" massType="NumberDensity" massFraction="1"
            importMetallicity="true" importTemperature="true" maxTemperature="0 K" importVelocity="true"
            importMagneticField="false" importVariableMixParams="false"
            useColumns="">
        <materialMix type="MaterialMix">
            <SpinFlipHydrogenGasMix
                    sourceWeight="1" wavelengthBias="0.5"
                    defaultMetallicity="0.02" defaultTemperature="1e4 K" defaultNeutralSurfaceDensity="10 Msun/pc2">
            </SpinFlipHydrogenGasMix>
        </materialMix>
    </CylindricalCellMedium>

We enable the \em autoRevolve flag to automatically construct a 3D distribition from the 2D input. We also enable
importing of metallicity and temperature, as required by the spin-flip material mix. From the documentation of the
CylindricalCellMedium and SpinFlipHydrogenGasMix classes, we conclude that the import file must provide the following
columns:

\f[ R_\mathrm{min}, \varphi_\mathrm{min}, z_\mathrm{min}, R_\mathrm{max}, \varphi_\mathrm{max}, z_\mathrm{max},
n_\mathrm{HI+H2}, Z, T, v_\mathrm{x}, v_\mathrm{y}, v_\mathrm{z}, \Sigma_\mathrm{HI+H2} \f]

We therefore construct a column text file with the following header information (and corresponding data columns):

    # Column 1: Rmin (cm)
    # Column 2: phimin (deg)
    # Column 3: zmin (cm)
    # Column 4: Rmax (cm)
    # Column 5: phimax (deg)
    # Column 6: zmax (cm)
    # Column 7: nHI+H2 (1/cm3)
    # Column 8: Z (1)
    # Column 9: T (K)
    # Column 10: vR (m/s)
    # Column 11: vphi (m/s)
    # Column 12: vz (m/s)
    # Column 13: SigmaHI+H2 (g/cm2)
    ...

When running the simulation, SKIRT logs the following column summary:

    Column 1: box Rmin <-- Rmin (cm)
    Column 2: box phimin <-- phimin (deg)
    Column 3: box zmin <-- zmin (cm)
    Column 4: box Rmax <-- Rmax (cm)
    Column 5: box phimax <-- phimax (deg)
    Column 6: box zmax <-- zmax (cm)
    Column 7: number density <-- nHI+H2 (1/cm3)
    Column 8: metallicity <-- Z (1)
    Column 9: temperature <-- T (K)
    Column 10: velocity R <-- vR (m/s)
    Column 11: velocity phi <-- vphi (m/s)
    Column 12: velocity z <-- vz (m/s)
    Column 13: neutral hydrogen mass surface density <-- SigmaHI+H2 (g/cm2)

From this log, we can verify that the imported quantity properly matches the expected quantity for each column, and
that the employed units match the provided data.


\section UserImportColOrderExplicit Explicit column re-ordering

Because of SKIRT implementation details, the expected column order in this example is far from intuitive. It would be
more logical to provide columns, for example, in the following order (we also dropped the optional column numbers):

    # Column: Rmin (cm)
    # Column: phimin (deg)
    # Column: zmin (cm)
    # Column: Rmax (cm)
    # Column: phimax (deg)
    # Column: zmax (cm)
    # Column: vR (m/s)
    # Column: vphi (m/s)
    # Column: vz (m/s)
    # Column: Z (1)
    # Column: T (K)
    # Column: nHI+H2 (1/cm3)
    # Column: SigmaHI+H2 (g/cm2)
    ...

This is possible as long as we provide the correct ordering in the \em useColumns ski file property:

    <CylindricalCellMedium
        ...
        useColumns="Rmin, phimin, zmin, Rmax, phimax, zmax, nHI+H2, Z, T, vR, vphi, vz, SigmaHI+H2">

This leads to the following column summary in the SKIRT log:

    Column 1: box Rmin <-- Rmin (cm)
    Column 2: box phimin <-- phimin (deg)
    Column 3: box zmin <-- zmin (cm)
    Column 4: box Rmax <-- Rmax (cm)
    Column 5: box phimax <-- phimax (deg)
    Column 6: box zmax <-- zmax (cm)
    Column 7: number density <-- column 12: nHI+H2 (1/cm3)
    Column 8: metallicity <-- column 10: Z (1)
    Column 9: temperature <-- column 11: T (K)
    Column 10: velocity R <-- column 7: vR (m/s)
    Column 11: velocity phi <-- column 8: vphi (m/s)
    Column 12: velocity z <-- column 9: vz (m/s)
    Column 13: neutral hydrogen mass surface density <-- SigmaHI+H2 (g/cm2)

Because the snapshot being imported is two-dimensional, all values for \f$\varphi_\mathrm{min}\f$ and
\f$\varphi_\mathrm{max}\f$ are zero. The CylindricalCellMedium class documentation clearly states that these columns
cannot be omitted. However, we can use the special column name "0" to work around this issue. We can omit the columns
from the import file:

    # Column: Rmin (cm)
    # Column: zmin (cm)
    # Column: Rmax (cm)
    # Column: zmax (cm)
    # Column: vR (m/s)
    # Column: vphi (m/s)
    # Column: vz (m/s)
    # Column: Z (1)
    # Column: T (K)
    # Column: nHI+H2 (1/cm3)
    # Column: SigmaHI+H2 (g/cm2)
    ...

And in the \em useColumns ski file property replace "phimin" and "phimax" by "0":

    <CylindricalCellMedium
        ...
        useColumns="Rmin, 0, zmin, Rmax, 0, zmax, nHI+H2, Z, T, vR, vphi, vz, SigmaHI+H2">

This now leads to the following column summary in the SKIRT log:

    Column 1: box Rmin <-- Rmin (cm)
    Column 2: box phimin <-- 0
    Column 3: box zmin <-- column 2: zmin (cm)
    Column 4: box Rmax <-- column 3: Rmax (cm)
    Column 5: box phimax <-- 0
    Column 6: box zmax <-- column 4: zmax (cm)
    Column 7: number density <-- column 10: nHI+H2 (1/cm3)
    Column 8: metallicity <-- Z (1)
    Column 9: temperature <-- T (K)
    Column 10: velocity R <-- column 5: vR (m/s)
    Column 11: velocity phi <-- column 6: vphi (m/s)
    Column 12: velocity z <-- column 7: vz (m/s)
    Column 13: neutral hydrogen mass surface density <-- column 11: SigmaHI+H2 (g/cm2)


\section UserImportColOrderAutomatic Automatic column re-ordering

There is a second, more automated mechanism to map physical to logical columns. This mechanism is enabled by specifying
the special value "*" for the \em useColumns property. The column names in the file header information now must exactly
match the expected logical column names specified by SKIRT. For example, the header information could become:

    # Column: box Rmin (cm)
    # Column: box phimin (deg)
    # Column: box zmin (cm)
    # Column: box Rmax (cm)
    # Column: box phimax (deg)
    # Column: box zmax (cm)
    # Column: velocity R (m/s)
    # Column: velocity phi (m/s)
    # Column: velocity z (m/s)
    # Column: metallicity (1)
    # Column: temperature (K)
    # Column: number density (1/cm3)
    # Column: neutral hydrogen mass surface density (g/cm2)
    ...

With the \em useColumns property as follows:

    <CylindricalCellMedium  ...  useColumns="*">

This yields the following column summary in the SKIRT log:

    Column 1: box Rmin <-- box Rmin (cm)
    Column 2: box phimin <-- box phimin (deg)
    Column 3: box zmin <-- box zmin (cm)
    Column 4: box Rmax <-- box Rmax (cm)
    Column 5: box phimax <-- box phimax (deg)
    Column 6: box zmax <-- box zmax (cm)
    Column 7: number density <-- column 12: number density (1/cm3)
    Column 8: metallicity <-- column 10: metallicity (1)
    Column 9: temperature <-- column 11: temperature (K)
    Column 10: velocity R <-- column 7: velocity R (m/s)
    Column 11: velocity phi <-- column 8: velocity phi (m/s)
    Column 12: velocity z <-- column 9: velocity z (m/s)
    Column 13: neutral hydrogen mass surface density <-- neutral hydrogen mass surface density (g/cm2)

As an extra option, we can use the special value "*0" to cause unavailable columns to be automatically replaced by
virtual zero columns. For example,

    # Column: box Rmin (cm)
    # Column: box zmin (cm)
    # Column: box Rmax (cm)
    # Column: box zmax (cm)
    # Column: velocity R (m/s)
    # Column: velocity phi (m/s)
    # Column: velocity z (m/s)
    # Column: metallicity (1)
    # Column: temperature (K)
    # Column: number density (1/cm3)
    # Column: neutral hydrogen mass surface density (g/cm2)
    ...

With:

    <CylindricalCellMedium  ...  useColumns="*0">

Yields:

    Column 1: box Rmin <-- box Rmin (cm)
    Column 2: box phimin <-- 0
    Column 3: box zmin <-- column 2: box zmin (cm)
    Column 4: box Rmax <-- column 3: box Rmax (cm)
    Column 5: box phimax <-- 0
    Column 6: box zmax <-- column 4: box zmax (cm)
    Column 7: number density <-- column 10: number density (1/cm3)
    Column 8: metallicity <-- metallicity (1)
    Column 9: temperature <-- temperature (K)
    Column 10: velocity R <-- column 5: velocity R (m/s)
    Column 11: velocity phi <-- column 6: velocity phi (m/s)
    Column 12: velocity z <-- column 7: velocity z (m/s)
    Column 13: neutral hydrogen mass surface density <-- column 11: neutral hydrogen mass surface density (g/cm2)

When using this option, it is important to verify that none of the columns with actual data have been inadvertently
replaced by zero.


\subsection UserImportColOrderFinding Finding expected column names

To determine the exact column names expected by SKIRT for a given import configuration, provide a dummy import file
with at least one column information line, and specify "*0" for the \em useColumns property. For example:

    # Column: (1)

With:

    <CylindricalCellMedium  ...  useColumns="*0">

Yields the following column summary in the SKIRT log:

    Column 1: box Rmin <-- 0
    Column 2: box phimin <-- 0
    Column 3: box zmin <-- 0
    Column 4: box Rmax <-- 0
    Column 5: box phimax <-- 0
    Column 6: box zmax <-- 0
    Column 7: number density <-- 0
    Column 8: metallicity <-- 0
    Column 9: temperature <-- 0
    Column 10: velocity R <-- 0
    Column 11: velocity phi <-- 0
    Column 12: velocity z <-- 0
    Column 13: neutral hydrogen mass surface density <-- 0

All quantities have been replaced by zero, so this is not a very useful import operation. But it does tell us the
expected column names.

*/
