/**

\page UserLymanAlpha Configuring for Lyman-alpha resonant line transfer

This page describes how to configure a SKIRT simulation for Lyman-alpha resonant line transfer. For a summary of the
related physics and information on the implementation in SKIRT, see \ref DevLymanAlpha in the developer guide.


\section UserLymanAlphaAssu Assumptions

Hydrogen is the most abundant element in our Universe and, correspondingly, the Lyman-alpha (Lyα) transition serves as
an important observational tool. Because Lyα is a resonance line, and because many astrophysical environments are
optically thick at Lyα wavelengths, the related radiative transfer calculations are nontrivial. The implementation of
Lyα capabilities in SKIRT is limited to models that conform to the following important assumptions (or rather
restrictions):

  - The spatial extent of the model is small relative to the distance to the observer (i.e. to the instruments in
  SKIRT). This allows considering all locations in the model to have the same distance to the observer and it allows
  using parallel projection.

  - The spatial extent of the model is small relative to a cosmological volume and the spatial grid in SKIRT is
  well-resolved across the model, implying a maximum size of the order of a single galaxy. This allows assuming that
  the wavelength shifts caused by cosmic expansion within each spatial cell are small relative to the width of the
  local Lyα cross section profile. (If this would not be the case, a photon packet might inadvertently 'skip' over the
  cross section profile rather than being scattered.)

  - The model is intended to trace the Lyα radiation emerging from the interstellar medium (ISM) that is part of the
  astrophysical object under study, while ignoring the effects of the circumgalactic and intergalactic medium (CGM/IGM)
  outside of the object. This avoids the need for providing a larger simulation box and/or including a subgrid recipe
  for handling the effects of the CGM/IGM.

  - The density distribution of neutral hydrogen is defined by the input model and remains fixed during the simulation.
  In other words, there is no self-consistent calculation of the ionized hydrogen fraction. Instead, the user is
  responsible for determining this in advance of the radiative transfer simulation.

Within these limitations, the model can be placed at any redshift supported by SKIRT (see \ref UserRedshift)

### Note on spatial grid resolution

\note [Camps et al. 2021](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...916...39C) investigated the effects of spatial
discretization in Lyα line radiation transfer simulations. They conclude that the spatial grids employed by
state-of-the art galaxy models do not sufficiently resolve the steep gradients in the hydrogen density, causing the
shape and magnitude of the Lyα line profiles to vary greatly depending on the specific grid, rendering the results
untrustworthy at best.


\section UserLymanAlphaConf Configuration

\subsection UserLymanAlphaConfMode Simulation mode

To enable the Lyα features in SKIRT, the configuration option MonteCarloSimulation::SimulationMode must set to \c
LyaExtinctionOnly. The configuration must then include at least one medium component with material mix
LyaNeutralHydrogenGasMix (also see section \ref UserLymanAlphaConfMedia) and it may but does not have to include
sources with Lyα line emission (see section \ref UserLymanAlphaConfSources). Sources and media will often be assigned a
bulk velocity (see section \ref UserLymanAlphaConfVelocity), but this is not a requirement. In the current
implementation the Lyα features cannot be enabled in conjunction with secondary emission.

Simulation-wide configuration options related to the Lyα photon cycle are offered by the option block LyaOptions. The
following table summarizes these options. See the LyaOptions class documentation for more information.

| Name | Description |
|------|-------------|
| LyaOptions::lyaAccelerationScheme | The Lyα acceleration scheme; also see \ref DevLymanAlphaNumrAcceleration |
| LyaOptions::lyaAccelerationStrength | The acceleration strength; higher is faster but less accurate |
| LyaOptions::includeHubbleFlow | whether to include the Hubble flow; also see \ref DevLymanAlphaPhysHubble |

\subsection UserLymanAlphaConfSources Sources

Although sources with any spatial and spectral distribution can be configured as part of a Lyα simulation model, it is
often useful to employ sources that produce Lyα-specific emission. We first consider four Lyα-related %SED classes that
can be associated with point sources and geometric sources representing stellar populations and/or diffuse ISM
emission.

The SingleWavelengthSED implements a spectral energy distribution in the form of a Dirac-delta function. All photon
packets are emitted at a single configurable wavelength, called the emission wavelength. The default value for the
emission wavelength is the central Lyα wavelength \f$\lambda_\alpha\f$.

The LyaGaussianSED class implements a Gaussian spectrum around the central Lyα wavelength \f$\lambda_\alpha\f$,
reflecting the thermal sub-grid motion in the source. Using the photon velocity shift \f$v_\mathrm{p}\f$ as the
spectral variable and a dispersion \f$s\f$ configured by the user in velocity units (usually km/s), the normalized
Gaussian spectrum can be written as \f[ S(v_\mathrm{p}) = \frac{1}{s\,\sqrt{2\pi}}\,\exp\left(
-\frac{v_\mathrm{p}^2}{2s^2} \right). \f] The corresponding thermal velocity is given by
\f$v_\mathrm{th}=\sqrt{2}\,s\f$.

The LyaDoublePeakedSED class implements a double-peaked spectrum centered on the Lyα wavelength \f$\lambda_\alpha\f$,
and corresponding to the spectrum that emerges from a static sphere of hydrogen gas surrounding a Lyα point source.
This can be used as a simple model to represent sub-grid gas embedded in the source. Again using the photon velocity
shift \f$v_\mathrm{p}\f$ as the spectral variable and a velocity scale \f$s\f$ configured by the user, the normalized
spectrum can be written as \f[ S(v_\mathrm{p}) = \frac{3v_\mathrm{p}^2}{2s^3\left[1+\cosh(v_\mathrm{p}^3/s^3)\right]}.
\f] The two peaks of this profile are situated at \f$v_\mathrm{p} \approx \pm 1.06938 \,s\f$.

The most sensible way for the user to normalize these SEDs is by specifying the bolometric luminosity using
IntegratedLuminosityNormalization with the 'all wavelengths' option.

The last Lyα-related %SED class adjusts or \em decorates another arbitrary %SED by converting a fraction of the
ionizing part of that %SED to Lyα emission. Specifically, the LyaSEDDecorator class has three configuration options:
the %SED to be decorated, the %SED modeling the Lyα emission (i.e., one of the two classes described above), and the
fraction of the ionizing radiation to be converted. It replaces the specified fraction of the luminosity in the
decorated %SED short of \f$\lambda_\mathrm{ion}=911.75\,\mathrm{Å}\f$ by Lyα emission with the specified profile. The
remaining fraction of ionizing radiation and all non-ionizing radiation in the decorated %SED is emitted as usual. The
luminosity normalization configured by the user applies to the decorated %SED.

We now consider two mechanisms to configure Lyα emission for imported sources. The first scheme uses the new
LyaGaussianSEDFamily and LyaDoublePeakedSEDFamily classes, which implement families of Gaussian and double-peaked SEDs
(as defined above) based on parameter values for the bolometric line luminosity \f$L_\alpha\f$ and the velocity scale
factor \f$s\f$ imported for each particle or cell. This scheme is appropriate for modeling independent Lyα sources, but
can be hard to use in combination with the regular %SED templates for stellar populations.

The second scheme addresses this issue by \em decorating an existing SEDFamily in a way similar to what has been
described above for single SEDs. Specifically, the LyaSEDFamilyDecorator class has three configuration options: the
%SED family to be decorated, the %SED modeling the Lyα emission (i.e., one of the two Lyα SEDs described above), and
the fraction of the ionizing radiation to be converted. The imported parameter values for each particle of cell are
passed on to the decorated SEDFamily. The spectrum returned by the decorated family is then adjusted by replacing the
specified fraction of the ionizing luminosity by Lyα emission with the specified profile. The remaining fraction of
ionizing radiation and all non-ionizing radiation is emitted as usual.

As a final note, it is often useful (or even required) to adjust the source wavelength biasing for the sources in a
model to ensure that the Lyα line profile is properly sampled within the context of the simulated model. When the
source spectrum is nonzero only in a narrow range, as for the LyaGaussianSED and LyaDoublePeakedSED classes discussed
above, photon packets with wavelengths outside of this range will not contribute to the results, so it makes sense to
disable wavelength biasing. In fact, when using the SingleWavelengthSED, the wavelength bias of the corresponding
source \em must be set to zero because the specific luminosity (needed for calculating the bias factor) is not defined
for this Dirac-delta distribution. In other cases, it might be beneficial to configure a wavelength bias distribution
with a specific range and/or shape to help ensure that emitted photon packets have wavelengths that are relevant for
the simulation.

\subsection UserLymanAlphaConfMedia Media

When the \c LyaExtinctionOnly simulation mode is selected (see section \ref UserLymanAlphaConfMode), the configuration
must include at least one medium component with material mix LyaNeutralHydrogenGasMix. This material mix offers a
configuration property to enable or disable support for polarization, and a second one to specify a default gas
temperature that is used when no other temperature is available, as described below.

The medium component equipped with a LyaNeutralHydrogenGasMix must define a temperature in each position of the spatial
domain. GeometricMedium components use the default temperature configured for the material mix as a fixed temperature
across the spatial domain, as well as for determining the total hydrogen mass in the component during setup, for
example through the configured MassColumnMaterialNormalization. ImportedMedium components offer an \c importTemperature
configuration flag. If this flag is turned on, the gas temperature for each particle or cell is specified in the
imported data file and the default temperature is ignored. If the flag is turned off, the default gas temperature
configured for the material mix is used instead for all particles or cells.

The mass normalization for geometric media and the masses or densities specified for imported media configured with the
LyaNeutralHydrogenGasMix always refer to the amount of \em neutral \em atomic hydrogen, i.e. excluding the ionized
hydrogen and molecular hydrogen fractions.

\subsection UserLymanAlphaConfVelocity Velocity

For GeometricSource and GeometricMedium components, a bulk velocity field can be specified through the combination of
the \c velocityDistribution and \c velocityMagnitude configuration options. As the names imply, the first option
specifies the spatial velocity distribution as a normalized VectorField object, and the second option specifies the
overall velocity magnitude (a multiplier applied to the normalized vector field, which may be negative to `flip' the
direction of the field vectors). If no vector field is specified or the magnitude is zero, the bulk velocity is taken
to be zero.

The VectorField subclasses, including for example UnidirectionalVectorField, RadialVectorField and
CylindricalVectorField, describe a normalized spatial distribution of 3D vectors. The field is normalized so that the
maximum length (norm) of the vectors in the field is equal to one. This also implies that the vector components are
dimensionless. As a result, vector fields can be used for various purposes, including the specification of magnetic
fields as well as velocity fields.

ImportedSource and ImportedMedium components offer an \c importVelocity configuration flag. If this flag is turned on,
the three bulk velocity vector components for each particle or cell are specified in the imported data file. If this
flag is turned off, the bulk velocity is taken to be zero.

SpecialtySource components (including point sources, surface sources and background sources) offer a single bulk
velocity specified through its three vector components.


*/
